hello you're watching BBC News we
welcome viewers on BBC One and BBC World
News as we expect today's coronavirus
government briefing from Downing Street
it will start very shortly I'm keeping
an eye on the doors of Downing Street as
we speak it'll be led today by the
Culture Media and Sport Secretary Oliver
Dowden and professor Jonathan van Tom
the deputy chief medical officer for
England that's bringing our health
correspondent Catherine Byrnes quick few
headlines of what we might expect then
in today's air briefing I think the
interesting thing today is going to be
seeing what the scientists say because
we've had the government starting to
bring in some levels of us opening up
and also we've seen in the last day or
so a little bit of controversy about
that we've seen scientists from Sage
which is the group that advises the
government saying this is too much too
soon so it's going to be very
interesting to see what questions are
asked about that why this is happening
right now and particularly so as the
government has been so keen to say we
are following the science and if there
appears to be dissent in the ranks now
this could cause potentially a problem
because the unions are already looking
to this actually we're going to go
straight to Downing Street now to hear
more good afternoon everyone and welcome
to the afternoon at Downing Street
briefing let me begin as usual with the
latest figures for million one hundred
and seventy one thousand four hundred
and eight Tests for coronavirus have now
been carried out in the United Kingdom
that includes one hundred twenty seven
thousand seven hundred and twenty two
tests carried out yesterday two hundred
and seventy two thousand eight hundred
and twenty six people have tested
positive that is an increase of two
thousand four hundred and forty five
cases since yesterday and sadly of those
tested positive for coronavirus across
all settings thirty eight thousand three
hundred and seventy-six have now died
that's an increase of two hundred and
fifteen fatalities since yesterday this
new figure includes deaths in all
settings not just in hospitals and of
course every one of those deaths is a
tragedy for the family involved and our
thoughts are rid of all of them now as
the Chancellor outlined yesterday those
numbers show we are now past the peak
and as we continue to flatten the curve
we are able to start reopening parts of
the economy we are also looking at how
to begin relaxing other measures so that
we can reestablish some normality in
other parts of our lives
which brings me to something which many
people have been eagerly awaiting news
about and that's the return of
light-sport now for more than two months
after sports stopped and after weeks of
round-the-clock discussions with medical
experts and professional sports bodies
I'm delighted to announce today that the
government has published guidance which
allows competitive sport to resume
behind closed doors from Monday at the
earliest and crucially only when it's
safe to do so
it's up to each individual sport to
decide exactly when to resume
competition they know their sports best
but football tennis horse racing Formula
One cricket golf rugby snooker and
others are all set to return to our
screens shortly with horse racing first
out of the gate in the Northeast next
week it's been a huge challenge to get
to this point we've taken a forensic
clinician led approach working with
public health England and the Department
of Health every step along the way and
we've had dozens of meetings and
published pages of detailed guidance
outlining first how to get to leaf Beth
athletes back into socially distance
training and then back into close
contact training and throughout all of
this we've put the safety of the
athletes coaches and support staff first
and foremost and by working so closely
with the sports themselves we've made
sure that it's been a collaborative
consensual effort to create the safest
possible environments for everyone
involved
now the guidance outlines various
measures that need to be in place for an
event to go ahead and to keep everyone
involved safe that includes a screening
process for coronavirus symptoms at the
venue a one-way system for people in
vehicles minimizing the use of dressing
rooms and of course maintaining social
disk
dancing wherever that is possible and as
all sports fully recognize ensuring the
mental health of their athletes and
staff is as important as their physical
health particularly in these very
difficult times and our guidance today
reinforces that it's taken a lot of hard
work to get us here today so thank you
to everyone involved and I know that
this will be welcome news for many now
of course much of the media attention
has focused on football because it has
that special life place in our national
life and recognizing its significance I
set two challenges for football's return
first that a reasonable number of
remaining Premier League games would be
broadcast free-to-air and second that
the financial benefits of returning
would be shared throughout the entire
football family so I'm glad to confirm
today that a third of matches to finish
the season will now be free to view
including the Liverpool vs everton Derby
and live Premier League football will be
on the BBC for the first time in its
history this is an open invitation for
all fans to be part of this significant
moment in our sporting history and it
also of course has the really serious
public health benefit of encouraging
people to watch at home which will be
essential now getting top leagues back
up and running will also release
much-needed funding to support clubs
lower down many of whom are cornerstones
of their local communities and with both
of these benefits I can now make it
official football is coming back of
course these headline sporting events
are only one part of the story and I
really am keenly aware that even as we
reopen some domestic competitive
fixtures not all events will be back on
and given the deserved momentum that
have built up behind women's sport after
football cricket and netball World Cups
I will be working hard with the Sports
Minister to make sure we don't lose any
of that progress visibility matters and
our daughters deserve to see football up
to sea female athletes on the main stage
now our focus is also on how we can get
grassroot sports back up and running
safely so that people can reunite with
their local teammates now well those
teams
compete together yet today I'm glad to
confirm that we are also relaxing the
rules on exercise further so that from
Monday people will be able to exercise
with up to five others from different
households crucially so long as they
remain two meters apart that means that
people who play team sports can train
together and do things like conditioning
and fitness sessions that don't involve
physical contact
it's another vital and important step in
the right direction now we've all become
a nation of early morning walkers Wix
workout errs and evening Park runners
and many of us have discovered how
valuable and therapeutic physical
activity can be and I hope that we'll
continue to make time for it even as
life returns to normal we still have a
way to go but for a sporting loving
nation today really is a significant
milestone we won't be sitting in the
stands for a while and things will be
very different to what we're used to but
live sports we'll be back on our screens
next week the British sporting recovery
has begun and with that I backed Holmes
over to Professor Jonathan van tan Thank
You Secretary of State I'm now going to
present the daily update to you
beginning with the first slide please
and this slide shows google mobility
data you can see on the left of the
slide the vertical dotted line which
shows when our lockdown measures started
and you can see that rapid diminution in
all forms of mobility and an increase in
people staying in the residential home
over time there have been small
increases across the piece up until the
end of this slide on the 21st of May but
the big difference has been in the use
of parks as it has been possible to ease
social distancing and that's very clear
from the data to the right of the slide
you will see for the period 21st to the
24th of May from the options and
lifestyle survey of Great Britain that
almost 40% of adults worked from home
compared to around 12% at the same time
the year before and 98% of adults very
reassuringly
said they have continued to try to stay
at least 2 meters away from other people
when outside the home next slide please
in terms of testing and new cases to
recap on the figures given to you by the
secretary of state as of the 30th of May
one hundred and twenty seven thousand
seven hundred and twenty two tests were
conducted or shipped please remember
again that some individuals a very small
proportion may have been tested more
than once but what you can really see to
the right hand side at the top of the
slide is that the level of testing is
staying very steadily now in and around
the 120,000 tests per day mark in terms
of confirmed cases there were two
thousand four hundred and forty five new
cases as of the 30th of May and if you
refer to the bottom graph you will see
those day two arrayed in graphical form
now I don't want to pass away from this
slide without being clear to you that I
have noticed the in the very tail end
the right side of the graph some
increase in cases in the last few days
but I want to be clear that that is a
trend that we have seen before in these
data and what is rather more important
is that you look at the seven-day
rolling average the blue line which
continues to show a clear downward trend
and that is important
next slide please in terms of the data
from hospitals there have been further
declines in estimated admissions with
kovat 19 in England 562 compared with
675 one week ago and the graph shows
this continued decline in terms of the
percentage of ventilated beds occupied
like Ovid 19 patients this has also
continued
declined across the four nations and now
stands at 10% compared with 12% one week
ago next slide please
these data of course show the total
number of people in hospital with kovat
19 as opposed to the new admissions and
we are currently running at a little
under 8,000 people in hospital with
kovat 19 which is down from nine
thousand four hundred this time last
week and with the exception of Wales
where there has been some changes to the
reporting methods you can see there are
continued declines in all other parts of
the UK next slide please
the final slide recaps again on the
Secretary of State's announcement that
as of the 30th of May there were 215
further deaths attributed to patients
with a confirmed positive positive kovat
19 diagnosis the graph on the right
shows the continued long-term decline
with those week on week variations day
by day but again importantly the
seven-day rolling average the orange
curve continues to be downwards and that
is the update on the statistics for
today thank you thank you so first we
will go to questions from the public and
number one comes from Kim from County
Durham and that's five video as you are
starting to reopen public spaces such as
beaches and parks and to planning to
reopen the shops in the near future I
would like to know when you're planning
to allow more access to public toilets
many of which remain closed to allow
those individuals who have disabilities
to be able to go out the same way those
who are able-bodied are able to do thank
you well thank you very much for your
question Kim and I I know it's a really
important point that you're raising
particularly people who suffer from
disabilities do need to have access to
public toilets when they go out and as
soon as we are able to do so consistent
with ensuring
that we can do so in a safe way in
accordance with public health guidance
we will do that and I know that my
friend the Secretary of State the person
in charge of Communities of Housing and
local government is looking into that as
we speak so hopefully we will be able to
make progress on that thank you for your
question now question number two comes
from Leslie from Whitstable who sent it
via text and I'll just read that out
why have England Scotland Wales and
Northern Ireland got their own track and
trace systems and how will these
interact with one another to ensure you
and capture everyone who may have been
in contact with someone who has the
virus well I may ask a professor of an
tanta to add a little more detail on
this Leslie but in response to your
question it's important to understand
what we're trying to do with track and
trace so essentially as we begin to get
the numbers of people with the virus
under control in this country at smaller
numbers an important part of keeping
those numbers down will be ensuring that
we identify people who have the enviros
so by testing them and then we track who
else they've been in contact with
that's why we've recruited 25,000 people
who will do that and then if they they
come across people who've been in
contact with someone who has had corona
virus they'll then ask them to self
isolate if appropriate and that is to
stop for the disease spreading we began
that in earnest on Thursday and be up
and running fully from the 1st of June
so that's Monday but on in terms of the
detail on the interaction would you like
to address that first event oh yes thank
you for the question the NHS is a
completely nationwide UK service for all
its citizens but it is a just a case in
point that the NHS is configured
slightly differently across the devolved
nations as it is in England
hence the organisation NHS England as
opposed to NHS UK now therefore it is
logical that there are slight
differences to the track and trace
system as it is going to be used across
the different NH
jurisdictions and the different devolved
administration's of the UK but the real
point here that I want to reassure
people about is that identifying cases
and tracing contacts is absolutely bread
and butter and business as usual for the
health protection agencies of the UK
they do this as a matter of routine for
tuberculosis cases for meningitis cases
for food poisoning outbreaks and believe
me those don't always occur you can't
say to a disease we want you to stay
this side of a border it doesn't happen
that way and the Health Protection
Agency's of the UK are very used to
working together and passing contacts
and patients through as necessary so I
really have no real worries or doubts
and that they won't be able to cope with
this in the particular covert 19
circumstances thank you and now we go to
questions from the media and the first
one comes from Chris Mason of the BBC
Chris are you there laughter new Jones
can you hear me yes thank you
Hugh and perpetual fear of zoom doom a
question to you both if I may what do
you say to those scientists and others
who say that you're easing the lockdown
in England too quickly thank you for
that that question Chris well I think
there's a couple of things just to note
before I asked professor Phantom also to
give his reflections first it's worth
bearing in mind that the scientific
advisory group the government scientific
advisory group consists of more than 50
scientists all of whom will have their
different perspectives and the
government takes a collective view on on
the entire advice from Sage secondly I
think the scientists who I've heard
speaks mine you're absolutely right to
urge caution we are at a risky point
that is to say that we have got the are
number below one it's in the range of
nor point seven to nine point nine but
we haven't got that much Headroom that's
why the Prime Minister has been clear
that we need to proceed in a very
cautious way so we've set out a roadmap
but at each stage
we're saying well we're not going to
proceed with that unless we are
confident that we can do so in a safe
way and indeed if we're not confident
will delay measures or indeed we may
even reimpose measures that's the whole
sort of baby step path that we are going
down so I think the companies is broadly
in agreement with what they're saying
but Professor van Tam I'll just add a
few things to say that the scientific
opinions always vary to some extent
across the piece that's natural
saij I think has been very clear and I
am being very clear that the easing of
social distancing the easing of lockdown
has to go slowly it has to go
painstakingly and we have to be
extremely cautious about how we do it
and the scientists will continue to give
that advice to the government no
apologies for that we will absolutely
continue to do that I believe and I
recall I was at the podium when the
disease activity was very high in the UK
and I said it's a very dangerous moment
I believe this is also a very dangerous
moment we have to get this right now
the sage papers have been published
they're online and many of them and it's
very clear that the measures already
taken to e social distancing Sage have
been very clear on that that the chances
of those easements allowing are to go
above 1 are extremely low indeed now the
measures that have been announced to
take place beginning Monday next week
Sage again I think has been very clear
it has looked at a similar package of
measures through the modelling and has
taken a view that it is likely that with
good compliance from the public and with
a test and trace contact tracing system
in place that these will not either
violate our going above 1 that is not an
absolute guarantee that they won't but
it is a high degree of confidence
providing contact tracing goes where
and providing the public adhere to the
limited easement in lockdown that's
taking place and so I think there's a
dual responsibility here that contact
tracing has got to go well but the
public have also got to engage with it
and to take the advice about self
isolation if it's given because you're a
contact very seriously in terms of the
advice about for example being able from
Monday to meet five people outdoors
socially distanced you know that's got
to again be taken seriously and it's got
to be taken in a reasonable measure if
you go out and you meet five people from
different households in the morning you
being the sixth person you then go and
do the same in the afternoon and the
same in the evening you can see how the
number of additional contacts that are
potentially possible
we'll just rack up so people have got to
be sensible and proportionate with the
freedom that you know we've absolutely
wanted to give to people because we need
to see loved ones and if people go
further and think oh it just won't
matter you know I'll just go a little
further with the measures that have been
announced then this won't work either
this virus as I said last time I was at
the podium has a natural are of three
one case will infect three more people
it's like having a spring in a box and
you've got the lid on now you can take
the lid off a little but you haven't
disconnected this spring or broken the
spring in any way if you take the lid
right off the spring still under tension
off it will go again and so this is a
dual responsibility here of government
to go slowly and carefully and to take
the advice from the scientists of the
scientists to watch this whole thing
very closely over the next few weeks and
of the public in general to actually
follow the guidance
don't tear the pants out of it and don't
go further than the guidance actually
says yes go on Chris tearing the pants
out of it that's quite a phrase and just
picking up on what on what you've both
said do you accept that if you have to
slam on the brakes or even reverse the
measures that you've taken getting
people to comply then may be much
trickier than it was in the earlier
stages of the lockdown yes I think in
short that is correct that's why we have
been so it pains to move with extreme
caution
in doing so and it is worth noting that
there's been quite a lot of sort of
loose talk about their ending of the
lockdown that something we are taking
very tentative steps principally focused
around activities outside where the risk
of transmission is much lower and we are
emphasizing through all of this the need
to maintain social distancing so most of
the pillars of this remain in place but
professor Phantom is ringing else you'd
like to add Thank You secretary yes I
just had a little bit of science and so
here that look infections pass on in a
moment with covert 19 and then the
incubation period is five days typically
and so the next round of infections
appears fairly quickly after afterwards
in other words this gets out of control
quite quickly if you allow it to and
then as you've seen from the previous
lockdown period it then takes many weeks
to get the break site you can't slow it
down as fast as you can let it go let it
let it take off and that's because these
cases then become problems for the
healthcare system and regrettably some
of them die and it takes a while for
them to work back out through the
healthcare system because they require
prolonged care and therefore from that
perspective you know always see don't
see this is a curve that's the same
going up as it is down it's quite easy
to go up it's quite hard then to get the
breaks back on and so I really hope that
people will follow the advice that is
given to the letter and not any further
than that and therefore were that we're
never in that position again
thank you now next question is from Paul
Brandt at ITV poorly there yeah I'm here
thank you and Secretary of State you are
announcing further lifting of lockdown
measures today despite the fact that
some of your own scientific advisors are
expressing concern is this government
still led by science and to Jonathan van
Tom if I may you mentioned just then
that one of the key things is having
contact tracing in place to allow these
lockdown measures to be lifted but some
of your colleagues are concerned that
actually the contact tracing isn't well
established yet so are we really ready
given the contact tracing may take
another couple of weeks to really kick
in well thanks your question for the
first simple answer is yes we continue
to be led by the science and indeed I
think today's guidance is an excellent
example of that I pay tribute to
Professor van Tam and others who have
been involved in this we have had
extensive discussions with the sporting
bodies concerned over a number of weeks
and we have come together with a package
of guidance which we are confident will
minimize risks and Angela and I will
leave press phantom to elaborate on it
but in terms of the actual that the
narrow measures of allowing the return
of elite sport behind closed doors
within the stadium the the impact is
going to be exceptionally minimal of
course we need to guard against wider
impacts for example we need to ensure
that people don't congregate around
stadiums and so on and that's why I very
much welcome the fact that we've got
more games on free-to-air there'll be a
very important message for fans and I
think the fans will behave responsibly
and British people have shown real good
common sense throughout all of this I'm
sure they will understand a need to
watch this at home and that's an
important message that we'll be getting
out so I think today's announcement is
an example of us working hand in glove
with the with the scientists but
professor fan town over to you yes thank
you so so elite sports men and women are
a very very tiny but important fraction
of our society and it's very clear that
playing elite sport again
in those very limited circumstances with
carefully controlled measures about how
you get those sportsman sports women to
the pitch that is not going to have any
meaningful impact on our it would be
potentially completely different if
there were lots of full stadia and all
of the activities that go around going
to a sports game the restaurants there
pubs the bars etc but we're not in that
space at the moment and so I think the
actual return of elite sport is
something that will be a nice Philip to
us all after the lockdown at a
psychological level but I don't think it
in any way is relevant to a conversation
about are now in terms of the the the
track and trace system yes it is new yes
it was announced last week of course
many countries are now putting these
systems in place and they will as my
Secretary of State has said be some
bedding in time required but Baroness
Harding has been very clear that the
system is ready and I think we have to
move forward on that basis thank you any
follow-up well yeah if I may just just
on this points about the government
following the scientific advice I mean
Wales Scotland and Northern Ireland take
a slightly different view to England in
particular Scotland and Wales which have
been more cautious with their lockdown
lifting so what is it about the
particular circumstance in England that
makes you confident that it is okay to
lift the lockdown measures to to a
greater degree in that nation well each
nation has to make its own decisions and
it's up to the Welsh and Scottish
Government's to explain the decisions
that they have taken in respected them
decisions that we have announced I think
three things have been influential in it
first is meeting those five tests which
the first secretary of state Dominic
Raab set out a few weeks ago the second
thing that has been influential in it
has been ensuring that the r which is
part of the first
five test remains below one and gives us
that that Headroom to be able to ease in
a very cautious careful slow way without
endangering the number spiraling up
above one and having the consequences
that professor van town talked about and
the third thing is as part of our
measures we need to ensure that we have
a good track and trace system in place
for the reasons that I outlined before
so that once we are aware that somebody
has had or has coronavirus ensuring that
they are tested and isolating them
people that they come into contact with
take appropriate isolation measures to
reduce the spread further but professor
van Thanh is there anything else you'd
like to add thank you only related to
say that you know Sir Patrick valence
has already said it from this podium
that the are is currently between point
seven and point nine this means we do
not have an enormous amount of headroom
and we will have to go very slowly and
we will have to go very cautiously and
this is a time where there are potential
dangers if we go too fast and I'm fully
aware of those and I'm perfectly
prepared to give that advice to the
government as needed thank you we now go
to Lisa Holland from Sky afternoon Lisa
good afternoon my question is for
professor burn town 8,000 new infections
every day and that's just in England and
supposedly doesn't include care homes
and hospitals can I ask you who is
catching coronavirus and how given that
we're 10 weeks into lockdown
ok let's go straight to presenter right
ok that that's a difficult question I
can't tell you who's catching
coronavirus what I can tell you is the
kinds of people that are at risk of
catching it and the kinds of people who
are at risk of being hospitalized the
elderly people with chronic underlying
conditions and people who are obese
that's very clear
we've also are looking very carefully
for other risk factors and the ONS has
already shown that the death rate is
higher in people in elementary
occupations where perhaps social
distancing is more difficult and we are
in the middle of a very large inquiry
looking at the black and minority ethnic
community but it is you're quite right
it's a case in point that there are
eight thousand deaths eight thousand
cases occurring a day according to ons
statistics and we need to get to the
bottom of that thank you and any
follow-up yeah if I could just ask
professor again one of your own
colleagues John Edmunds and other
government adviser scientific governor
advisor and said on Sky News today my
frustration has been that governments
are pretending they're not making the
decisions and it's us that are making
the decisions but that's not the case
that's what he says what do you say do
you think that is true could you repeat
that question please yes we spoke to
John Edmunds on Sky News today who said
and I quote my fright my frustration has
been the government are pretending
they're not making the decisions in
other words they're led by the science
and it's us that are making the
decisions but that's not the case at all
so in other words do you think the
government is listening to scientific
advice I should say just at the
beginning I know your question was
addressed first went out government has
been clear along with prime ministers
been clear that the ministers take
responsibility for four decisions base
that of course we take scientific advice
in in doing so but I don't really think
I think that's absolutely right our our
science advice has been so far that the
social distancing that has already been
eased is consistent with keeping the are
below one the consensus of scientific
advice is that the next set of measures
announced for Monday with contact racing
in place should also keep the are within
one hour advice is then to
continue to watch this very carefully
and we will continue to give further
advice to the government about whether
we think it is possible to make further
easements after that and that will
absolutely be a matter of advice for us
and decision for the politicians thank
you
we now move on to Iain Herbert from The
Mail on Sunday yeah it's very much a
question for you if I could
secretary of state police forces have
identified yesterday six Premier League
games which present public health
concerns and require neutral venues but
clubs and firms are resisting that and
insisting that their own home stadia
will be safe
so if police express public health fears
should clubs and fans accept that and
accept neutral venues well the short
answer is yes I mean it is worth just
understanding what we are announcing
today so the government is publishing
guidelines which are setting out how
elite sports can resume behind closed
doors in a safe way it is then up to
each individual sport to apply those
guidelines and determine the way in
which they they do so in respect of
where matches take place there is a
well-established mechanism through the
local Safety Authority the local Safety
Authority brings together police and
local authorities to determine whether
it is appropriate to have a match as
scheduled at home venue or not if that
determination is made that it is not
safe to do so and clearly we have to
they have to be mindful of risks such as
fans congregating particular it's a
crucial match and it's a home match
around the stadium if they advise that
they shouldn't do it then can curly fans
should listen to that but again I pay
tribute to fans because I think that in
common with most the British people
they've taken a sensible approach to
this they understand what we're doing
everyone I think most people that's
going to welcome the fact that if we can
get live sport back again in a safe way
behind closed doors we should do so but
they are
the standard limitations of doing that
in the current environment it was only a
present you want to come in I'll say
that you know the issue of fans
congregating outside stadiums is clearly
a police matter and it's clearly
something we would not want in the
current stage of social distancing
that's absolutely clear but beyond that
in terms of the actual staging of the
game itself the premises have to be
absolutely suitable for the new
conditions in which we find ourselves
this is about an end-to-end journey for
the players the officials the media and
the medical staff coming from wherever
they live to take part in what is
required for a game behind closed doors
and there has to be enough understanding
that the venue can cope with the
segregation and the organization and the
social distancing right up until the the
kickoff whistle and again exactly from
the end of the final whistle to make
that the safest possible experience for
everybody there and that's going to be a
crucial factor as well in choosing these
venues and I know the Premier League are
all over that and thinking about it very
carefully thank you any follow up yes
thank you thank you for your answers on
that so it was interesting to hear you
say Secretary of State that the Everton
Liverpool game will be one of the
free-to-air fixtures which is a
significant gesture from Sky to give
that to BBC is that designed to stop
fans gathering at what would really be a
you know a very high-profile game and
therefore does that make it more likely
that the game would be staged at
Goodison Park Everton rather than a
neutral ground because that was one of
the six I referred to earlier well first
of all I should just clarify it will be
free-to-air that not all three term
matches will be on BBC some will be on
other platforms that provide free-to-air
but your your point is correct on the
lesson one of the reasons why I was
pushing a
Reeta air broadcasting was precisely
this point to discourage fans from going
to first principles houses to watch
these matches but also to the stadia
themselves but I really do think in
terms of the actual decision as to where
a match should take place that's not a
decision that I can best take as a
politician that is decision that is best
place are taken by the the local
authorities and the police through the
local Safety Authority that is the
normal way for for doing it night I
trust those mechanisms but anything yes
so on the subject of fans gathering I'm
a devout Boston United season ticket
holder and I'm desperate for football to
come back but I've also talked earlier
in this press briefing about sticking to
the rules and not going further than the
rules and fans gathering is exactly the
kind of thing that would be something
which went far beyond the kind of social
distancing that we need to continue to
practice and the kind of small numbers
that we need to stick to as of Monday
and so this is how these guidelines
begin to decay at the edges and then
this will cause trouble for all of us if
it happens so I just want to be clear on
that thank you
next up we have Lucy Johnson from Sunday
Express hello good afternoon professor
Fantan said we need a period of bedding
in before the contact system but before
we know we'll go well how will people
know it is there having a genuine call
from a contact tracer
and not a scammer that's a that's a very
good question and first of all I would
say you'll see we have we've made a lot
of progress with this in terms of
recruiting the 25,000 contact tracers
and we've done a lot of work leading up
to this covering it exactly those sort
of points so people can have that
reassurance but I think professor on
time you're probably the best place to
actually talk about the the mechanisms
of how that would work yeah so all of
that has been really carefully
considered by the test and tray system
I don't have the details but they are
absolutely sited on the fact that there
may be attempts to make malicious
interference but actually it would be
quite difficult to do that it would
become apparent quite quickly that this
was a professional talking who
understood about contact tracing and the
elements of it I don't think people are
going to fall for this any follow-ups
there there are scientific estimates
that potentially tens of thousands of
healthy people will be asked to
unnecessarily self isolate at of course
significant personal and economic cost
after contact tracing how can you stop
this happening well I'm afraid we can't
stop it happening and this is part of
the cost of track and trace we have made
a decision as a government and I think
leave it to Jonathan to confirm that
based on extensive scientific advice and
discussions that this is the trade-off
that we are making we're saying that in
order to help facilitate wider easing of
a lockdown that will benefit everyone it
will be the case that if people have had
coronavirus being tested and then
they've been they've been in contact
with others those people will be asked
to isolate and it will for those people
that's not something they will
particularly want to do but I I hope
that the British people and this is my
sense throughout all of this there has
been this a common sense and
understanding of why we're doing this
this is to benefit the wider public
health and in isolating they are helping
to ensure that we keep the our rate low
and that we can continue to ease as is
safe to do so and I think that is an
improvement on the very stringent
lockdown measures that we we had before
we commence this process but but
professor Ann Thomas really yes I'm
going to go back to my spring and the
fact that you know the coronavirus is
like a coiled spring ready to get out if
we don't and start infecting many people
again if we don't keep on top of it now
the epidemiological prints of
of stopping that transmission occurring
is taking people who have the infection
who are infectious out of the system
through isolation at home and also
taking out of the system temporarily
people they may already have infected
now if you and I were contacts in a
meaningful way that public health
England said meant that you might I was
the case you might in the next fourteen
days because that's the incubation
period develop coronavirus infection and
you may become infectious to others one
or two days before your symptoms show
the only thing I can do is say to you
that your risk window is for the next 14
days and please will you isolate for the
good of others and we'll all have to
take that on the chin if it happens to
us because we can't look inside people
and say well you've definitely been
exposed and for you your symptoms are
going to appear on day X it's just not
possible we can't even say of the people
who are exposed which ones will be the
ones that go on to be the next round of
cases of corona virus infection and so
yes it is going to be painful for some
people when they receive a notification
when Phe contact them and say you are a
definite contact of somebody who's had
corona virus infection we need you to
stay at home for the next 14 days but as
a secretary of state clearly said and
he's absolutely right the alternative is
that we go back to stopping those
contacts occurring through whole of
society isolation otherwise known as
lockdown so we either try and live with
this in the best way we can and have
something towards a normal life or we
have to tolerate this system with some
of the difficulties it's going to bring
for some people
thank you and now finally to Toby helm
from the observer hello could I ask the
Secretary of State first of all the
Prime Minister went talking about
Dominic Cummings earlier this week said
that while he wanted him to remain in
post he said that he was leaving it to
the public to decide what they thought
of the controversy surrounding him a few
days on it's pretty clear what the
public do think we are running an
opinion or today which shows a very very
high majority of people believe he
should be sacked there's a petition
showing more than a million people
believe the same thing and MP's inboxes
are groaning with complaints so will the
Prime Minister will the government
listen to the public or will it simply
ignore them and could I ask professor
van Tam you say this is a very dangerous
moment so what do you say to people in
authority should it be the people should
should people in authority give a lead
and obey the rules above all well let me
deal with your first question first Toby
as as you well know and many viewers
will know Dominic Cummings gave a very
extensive explanation of his behavior on
Monday and answered all questions in in
relation to that and the prime minister
accepted that explanation and on that
basis kept him in post and that remains
the position professor in town and you
want to add yes thank you for the
question I'm quite happy to answer it in
my opinion the rules are clear and they
have always been clear in my opinion
they are for the benefit of all and in
my opinion they apply to all any follow
up Toby just follow up to the Secretary
of State you didn't actually address the
direct question as far as
remember I mean is the is the Prime
Minister's the government actually going
to listen to the public or is it just
going to well of course the Prime
Minister and the government listen to
the public in respect of mr. Dominic
Cummings this has been dealt with
extensively the Prime Minister has
answered questions on it repeatedly
Dominic Cummings has answered questions
repeatedly on it I understand that
people have a range of views in respect
that it is worth noting that Durham
police have made their their statement
in in respect to that and in terms of
not taking any further action so I think
that this has now been dealt with on
that note I think we are now finished
thank you very much and that concludes
the afternoon press briefing thank you
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News